---
layout: post
title: Edition 1 2020 
---

## Naming of Melakartha ragas:

**The known:**

The 72 melakartha ragas are divided into 12 chakras each with 6 ragas. Ragas in one chakra differ only in Daivatam and Nishadam.  

**TWIL:**

The names of the ragas follow a number system called [Katapayadi system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katapayadi_system). In this system 2 to 4 alphabets are assigned to represent a number. The name of the raga depends on the position of among the 72 ragas.

For instance alphabet ka and pa represent 1 and alphabets kha and ra represent 2; 21st raga is called kee(1)ra(2)vani, 22nd raga is called kha(2)ra(2)harapriya and 12th raga is called ru(2)pa(1)vati. Notice how first alphabet represents units place and second alphabet represents tens place.

## Unequal Airpods battery discharge:

**The known:**

Apple released its flagship product **Airpods** whose USP is that it is a truly wireless device with just two pods slipping into ears. They are charged with help of a case provided with purchase.

**TWIL:**

Pods (Left and Right) get discharged at different rates. 

One reason I found this might be hapenning because phone can connect to only one streaming device thereby to left or right pod which then forwards data to other pod. But this might not be true because bluetooth headphones (of other brands) connect to phone in handsfree protocol. 

Other reason I found was that at any given time microphone in one pod gets activated resulting in unequal consumption of battery. This seemed like a plausible answer but perhaps it requires further digging some other time.