---
layout: post
title: DB Basics
---

## Database:
Database is a collection of related information  in an organized manner so that it can be retrieved whenever required.

### Characteristics of a database(ACID):
**Database transaction:** A transaction symbolizes a unit of work performed within a database management system against a database

**ACID**(Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) is a set of properties of database transaction intended to guarantee its validity even in the event of errors, power failures, etc.
* **A**tomicity: It requires all the transactions to be "all or nothing": if one part of the transaction fails, then the entire transaction fails, and the database state is left unchanged.
* **C**onsistency: The consistency property ensures that any transaction will bring the database from one valid state to another in all of its instances.
* **I**solation:The isolation property ensures that the concurrent execution of transactions results in a system state that would be obtained if transactions were executed sequentially.
* **D**urability:The durability property ensures that once a transaction has been committed, it will remain so, even in the event of power loss, crashes, or errors.

****
### Types of databases:
* **Relational databases:**
This is currently the most used type of database. In this model the data is organized into relations or tables of rows and columns.
  * Rows are also called as records or tupels.
  * Columns are also called as attributes.
  * They are designed to scale vertically not horizontally. It means that when new data comes in it will be added to the existing table but if a new attribute is to be added it is given a saperate table and is tracked along with the main table.
  * Common use of databases includes tracking information that are maintained in multiple tables. The bit of information that links entries across the tables is called "KEY". We will explore more on this concept of keys in the next article.
* **Object-oriented:**
The rise of object oriented programming languages saw the change in how databases are handled. Programmers and designers began to treat the data in their databases as objects.
* **NoSQL:**
The limitations of relational model such as inability to handle unstructured data and unconventional data sources, Broken keys, etc. have given rise to different breed of databases called NoSQL(spelled no sequel).
NoSQL databases are often very fast, do not require fixed table schemas, avoid join operations by storing denormalized data, and are designed to scale horizontally. The most popular NoSQL systems include MongoDB, Couchbase, Riak, Memcached, Redis, CouchDB, Hazelcast, Apache Cassandra, and HBase which are all open-source software products.
